Major update: added layers to cascade (#15713)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/cascade/index.md

Though style sheets come from these different origins and can be within different [layers](en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer) in each of these origins, they overlap in scope; to make this work, the cascade algorithm defines how they interact. Before addressing the interactions, let's define some terms:

### User-agent stylesheets

User-agent, or browsers, have basic style sheets that give default styles to any document. These style sheets are named **user-agent stylesheets**. Most browsers use actual stylesheets for this purpose, while others simulate them in code. The end result is the same. 

Some browsers let users modify the user-agent stylesheet, but this is rare and not something that can be controlled. 

Although some constraints on user-agent stylesheets are set by the HTML specification, browsers have a lot of latitude: that means some differences exist between browsers. To simplify the development process, Web developers may use a CSS reset stylesheet, such as [normalize.css](https://github.com/necolas/normalize.css), which sets common properties values to a known state for all browsers before beginning to make alterations to suit their specific needs. 

> Unless the user-agent stylesheet includes an [`!important`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#the_!important_exception) next to a property, making it "important", styles declared by author styles, including a reset style sheet, take precedence over the user-agent styles, regardless of the specificity of the associated selector.

Reviewer: We'll just forget the important "issue". No harm done.

### Author stylesheets

> **Author stylesheets** are the most common type of style sheet; these are the styles written by web developers. These styles can reset user-agent styles, as noted above, and define the styles for the design of a given web page or application. The author, or web developer, defines the styles for the document using one or more linked or imported stylesheets, {{HTMLElement('style')}} blocks, and inline styles defined with the {{htmlattrxref('style')}} attribute. These author styles define the look and feel of the website — its theme.

Reviewer: Up to you, but I don't think the styling is needed on "Author stylesheets" here, or in the sections below:
```suggestion
Author stylesheets are the most common type of style sheet; these are the styles written by web developers. These styles can reset user-agent styles, as noted above, and define the styles for the design of a given web page or application. The author, or web developer, defines the styles for the document using one or more linked or imported stylesheets, {{HTMLElement('style')}} blocks, and inline styles defined with the {{htmlattrxref('style')}} attribute. These author styles define the look and feel of the website — its theme.
```

Author: I think it helps the reader.

## Cascading order

The cascading algorithm determines how to find the value to apply for each property for each document element. The following steps apply to the cascading algorithm:

  1. **Relevance**: It first filters all the rules from the different sources to keep only the rules that apply to a given element. That means rules whose selector matches the given element and which are part of an appropriate `media` at-rule.
  
  2.  **Origin and importance**: Then it sorts these rules according to their importance, that is, whether or not they are followed by `!important`, and by their origin. Ignoring layers for the moment, the cascade order is as follows:
  |   Order (low to high)  | Origin      | Importance   |
  | - | ----------- | ------------ |
  | 1   | user-agent (browser) | normal       |
  | 2   | user        | normal       |
  | 3   | author (developer)    | normal       |
  | 4   | CSS @keyframe animations  |             |
  | 5   | author (developer)     | `!important` |
  | 6   | user        | `!important` |
  | 7   | user-agent (browser) | `!important` |
  | 8   | CSS transitions |              |

>   3. **Specificity:** In case of equality with an origin, the [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity) of a value is considered to choose one or the other. The specificity of the selectors are compared, and the declaration with the highest specificity wins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  3. **Specificity:** In case of equality with an origin, the [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity) of a rule is considered to choose one value or another. The specificity of the selectors are compared, and the declaration with the highest specificity wins.
```

  - Style sheet
  - Stylesheets
spec-urls: https://drafts.csswg.org/css-cascade/

---
{{CSSRef}}

> The **cascade** is an algorithm that defines how user agents combine property values originating from different sources. The cascade defines the origin and layer that takes precedence when declarations in more than one origin or cascade layer set a value for a property on an element.

Reviewer: The terms _origin_ and _cascade layer_ "feel" like they have a CSS meaning (which I don't know). Would be good to define them, or perhaps at least for origin link down to the Origin types section.

Author: added links to orgin (below) and @layers (different page)

> The cascade lies at the core of CSS, as emphasized by the name: _**Cascading**_ Style Sheets. When a [selector](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Selectors) matches an element, the property value from the origin with the highest precedence gets applied, even if the selector from a lower precedence orgin or layer has greater [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity).  

Reviewer: I did not know this! I wonder if we should bold it - because I'm sure I'm not the only one to make the assumption that specificity is more important.

Reviewer: Typo
```suggestion
The cascade lies at the core of CSS, as emphasized by the name: _**Cascading**_ Style Sheets. When a [selector](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Selectors) matches an element, the property value from the origin with the highest precedence gets applied, even if the selector from a lower precedence origin or layer has greater [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity).  
```

This article explains what the cascade is and the order in which {{Glossary("CSS")}} [declarations](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CSSStyleDeclaration) cascade, covering cascade layers and origin type. Understanding origin precedence is key to understanding the cascade.

> ## Origin types

Reviewer: It looks like you have listed the origin priority in reverse order. As a reader it might be nice to summarise that here.

Author: these are organized in terms of ability to understand, not order. Added 
> Before addressing the interactions, let's define some terms:
to make that clear. Also changed layer to be more of a definition:
>The cascade order is based on origin type. The cascade within each origin type is based on the declaration order of [cascade layers](en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer) within that type. For all origins - user-agent, author, or user - styles can be declared within or outside of named or anonymous layers. When declared using [`layer`, `layer()`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@import) or [`@layer`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer), styles are placed into the specified named layer, or into an anonyous layer if no name is provided. Styles declared outside of a layer are treated as being part of an anonymous last declared layer.

Reviewer: Yes, this sounds better.

> The CSS cascade algorithm's job is to select CSS declarations in order to determine the correct values for CSS properties. CSS declarations originate from different origin types: **[User-agent stylesheets](#user-agent_stylesheets)**,  **[Author stylesheets](#author_stylesheets)**, and **[User stylesheets](#user_stylesheets)**.

Reviewer: originates from different origin a bit repetitive. Maybe:
```suggestion
The CSS cascade algorithm's job is to select CSS declarations in order to determine the correct values for CSS properties. CSS declarations come from different origin types: **[User-agent stylesheets](#user-agent_stylesheets)**,  **[Author stylesheets](#author_stylesheets)**, and **[User stylesheets](#user_stylesheets)**.
```

Though style sheets come from these different origins and can be within different [layers](en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer) in each of these origins, they overlap in scope; to make this work, the cascade algorithm defines how they interact. 

### User-agent stylesheets

User-agent, or browsers, have basic style sheets that give default styles to any document. These style sheets are named **user-agent stylesheets**. Most browsers use actual stylesheets for this purpose, while others simulate them in code. The end result is the same. 

Some browsers let users modify the user-agent stylesheet, but this is rare and not something that can be controlled. 

Although some constraints on user-agent stylesheets are set by the HTML specification, browsers have a lot of latitude: that means some differences exist between browsers. To simplify the development process, Web developers may use a CSS reset stylesheet, such as [normalize.css](https://github.com/necolas/normalize.css), which sets common properties values to a known state for all browsers before beginning to make alterations to suit their specific needs. 

> Unless the user-agent stylesheet includes an [`!important`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#the_!important_exception) next to a property, making it important, styles declared by author styles, including a reset style sheet, take precendence over the user-agent styles, regardless of the specificity of the associated selector.

Reviewer: Redundant, unless you explain what "making it important" means. 
```suggestion
Unless the user-agent stylesheet includes an [`!important`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#the_!important_exception) next to a property, styles declared by author styles, including a reset style sheet, take precedence over the user-agent styles, regardless of the specificity of the associated selector.
```
You could instead replace that "with _overriding any other precedence_" (or whatever the precise definition is).

Author: I use "important" throughout, so was basically defining what important is right here. Should I quote the word important so people realize it's a definition?

> Unless the user-agent stylesheet includes an [`!important`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#the_!important_exception) next to a property, making it "important",

would that clarify that for you, the reader?

Reviewer: > would that clarify that for you, the reader?

Not really. By way of example, as an ignorant reader I interpret:

> includes an [!important](https://github.com/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#the_!important_exception) next to a property, making it "important"

As

> includes an [!important](https://github.com/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#the_!important_exception) next to a property, making it "extra special and pretty "

Is "extra special and pretty" what you mean by important?

Reviewer: Or to put it another way, on first instance of `!important` I assume that the keyword means important. You don't have to tell me that. You could tell me what important actually implies though in "CSS terms".

Author: quoted important and filed an issue to create an important page.
https://github.com/mdn/content/issues/15732

### Author stylesheets

**Author stylesheets** are the most common type of style sheet; these are the styles written by web developers. These styles can reset user-agent styles, as noted above, and define the styles for the design of a given web page or application. The author, or web developer, defines the styles for the document using one or more linked or imported stylesheets, {{HTMLElement('style')}} blocks, and inline styles defined with the {{htmlattrxref('style')}} attribute. These author styles define the look and feel of the website — its theme.

### User stylesheets

In most browsers, the user (or reader) of the web site can choose to override styles using a custom **user stylesheet** designed to tailor the experience to the user's wishes. Depending on the user agent, [user styles can be configured](https://www.thoughtco.com/user-style-sheet-3469931) directly or added via browser extensions. 

> ### Cascade layers

Reviewer: I still don't know what a layer is. At this point I'm confused as to why this is under origins. Might make perfect sense doesn't feel like it unless you know what a layer is.

Author: I liked the "named or anonymous layers". Likely should link the cascade layer term instead. Fixing and committing inline.

Reviewer: I need to think about that. 

I guess it just feels like the whole section is about origins, and now we have this section about layers. Is a layer an origin?

Author: changed the intro to be about definitions and expanded the CL definition.

> The cascade order is based on origin type. The cascade within each origin type is based on the declaration order of cascade layers within that type. For all origins - user-agent, author, or user - styles can be declared within or outside of [named or anonymous layers](en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer). When declared within a layer, the styles are placed into the specified layer. Styles declared outside of a layer are treated as being part of an anonymous last declared layer. 

Author: ```suggestion
The cascade order is based on origin type. The cascade within each origin type is based on the declaration order of [cascade layers](en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer) within that type. For all origins - user-agent, author, or user - styles can be declared within or outside of named or anonymous layers. When declared within a layer, the styles are placed into the specified layer. Styles declared outside of a layer are treated as being part of an anonymous last declared layer. 
```

  
  2.  **Origin and importance**: Then it sorts these rules according to their importance, that is, whether or not they are followed by `!important`, and by their origin. Ignoring layers for the moment, the cascade order is as follows:
  |     | Origin      | Importance   |
  | - | ----------- | ------------ |
  | 1   | user-agent (browser) | normal       |
  | 2   | user        | normal       |
  | 3   | author (developer)    | normal       |
  | 4   | CSS @keyframe animations  |             |
  | 5   | author (developer)     | `!important` |
  | 6   | user        | `!important` |
  | 7   | user-agent (browser) | `!important` |
  | 8   | CSS transitions |              |

  3. **Specificity:** In case of equality with an origin, the [specificity](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity) of a value is considered to choose one or the other. The specificity of the selectors are compared, and the declaration with the highest specificity wins.
  4. **Order of appearance**: In the origin with precedence, if there are competing values for a property that are in style block matching selectors of equal specificity, the last declaration in the style order is applied  

> The cascade is in ascending order, meaning animations have precedence of normal values, whether those are declared in user, author, or user-agent styles, important values take precedence over animations, and transitions have precedence over important values.  

Reviewer: This text refers to the table (point 2) right? If you can, I would put it in the bullet point. Perhaps label the order column in the table to something like (Priority (increasing)).

Author: added Order (low to high) to every table

Reviewer: Yes, that's better. You might use precedence or priority rather than "order" here.

Reviewer: You might also consider this here (note, the use of "over normal" instead of "of normal").
```suggestion
From the table you can see that: animations have precedence over normal values, whether those are declared in user, author, or user-agent styles, important values take precedence over animations, and transitions have precedence over important values.  
```

> The cascade is in ascending order, meaning animations have precedence of normal values, whether those are declared in user, author, or user-agent styles, important values take precendence over animations, and transitions have precedence over important values.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The cascade is in ascending order, meaning animations have precedence of normal values, whether those are declared in user, author, or user-agent styles, important values take precedence over animations, and transitions have precedence over important values.  
```

Reviewer: @estelle OK, I see that https://www.etymology-online.com/precedence is a real word. If you can use precedence and it serves the same purpose, then please do.

 > **Note:**  **Transitions and animations**
 >
 > Property values set by animation {{cssxref('@keyframes')}} are more important than all normal styles (those with no [`!important`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/Specificity#the_!important_exception) set). 
 >
 >Property values being set in a {{cssxref('transition')}} take precendence over all other values set, even those marked with `!important`. 

The cascade algorithm is applied _before_ the specificity algorithm, meaning if `:root p { color: red;}` is declared in the user stylesheet (line 2) and a less specific `p {color: blue;}` is in the author stylesheet (line 3), the paragraphs will be blue.

## Basic example

> Before taking a deeper look at how cascade layers impact the cascade, let's look at an example involving multiple sources of CSS across the various origins, and work thru the steps of the cascade algorithm:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before taking a deeper look at how cascade layers impact the cascade, let's look at an example involving multiple sources of CSS across the various origins, and work through the steps of the cascade algorithm:
```

```html
<ul>
<li class="specific">1<sup>st</sup></li>
<li>2<sup>nd</sup></li>
</ul>
```

In this case, declarations inside `li` and `.specific` rules should apply.

The `1px` is for print media. Due to lack of _relevance_ based on it's media type. It is removed from consideration. 

No declaration is marked as `!important`, so the precedence order is author style sheets before user style sheets or user-agent stylesheet. Based on _origin and importance_,  the `1em` and the `10px` are removed from consideration as they are from the user and user-agent stylesheets, resepectively. Both origins have lower precedence for normal styles than author styles, so even though the `1em` had higher specificity, it gets removed by the algorithm before specificity comes into play. 

> There are three declarations in user stylesheets:

Reviewer: I am confused, There is only one declaration the user stylesheet:
```
.specific { margin-left: 1em }
```

Author: the 1px is for print. it is 0, 3, 5. I added a little bit more text to make it clearer, hopefully. Included the whole selector block just in case.

Reviewer: This helps, but you misunderstand the problem. None of those selectors are in _user_ stylesheets.
```suggestion
There are three declarations in author stylesheets:
```

Reviewer: @estelle Please don't resolve this without an explanation ^^^. You refer to three declarations in user stylesheets, but all the declarations are defined in author stylesheets. Unless you are saying that author stylesheets == user stylesheets this feels wrong.

```html
<ul>
<li class="specific">1<sup>st</sup></li>
<li>2<sup>nd</sup></li>
</ul>
```

In this case, declarations inside `li` and `.specific` rules should apply.

Once again, there are four steps in the cascade algorithm, in order:

  1. Relevance
  2. Origin and importance
  3. Specificity
  4. Order of appearance 

The `1px` is for print media. Due to lack of _relevance_ based on it's media type. It is removed from consideration. 

> No declaration is marked as `!important`, so the precedence order is author style sheets over user style sheets over user-agent stylesheet. Based on _origin and importance_,  the `1em` and the `10px` are removed from consideration as they are from the user and user-agent stylesheets, resepectively. Both origins have lower precedence for normal styles than author styles, so even though the user style on `.specific` of `1em` had higher specificity, is it a normal declaration in a user style sheet thus has less precedence than any author styles, so it gets removed by the origin and importance step of the algorithm before specificity even comes into play. 

Reviewer: Fixes typo "resepectively" and improves the last sentence, which "was a bit messy".
```suggestion
No declaration is marked as `!important`, so the precedence order is author style sheets over user style sheets over user-agent stylesheet. Based on _origin and importance_,  the `1em` from the user stylesheet and the `10px` from the user-agent stylesheet are removed from consideration. 
Note that even though the user style on `.specific` of `1em` has a higher specificity, is it a normal declaration in a user style sheet. As such it is a lower precedence than any author styles, and gets removed by the origin and importance step of the algorithm before specificity even comes into play. 
```

There are three declarations in user stylesheets:

```css
li { margin-left: 0 } /* from author css 1 */
```

```css
@media screen {
  li { margin-left: 3px }
}
```

```css
@layer namedLayer {
  li {
    margin-left: 5px ;
  }
}
```

> The last one, the `5px` is part of a cascade layer. Declarations in layers have less precedence than styles not in a layer within the same origin type. This is also removed by step 2 of the algorithm, _origin and importance_.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The last one, the `5px` is part of a cascade layer. Declarations in layers have lower precedence than styles not in a layer within the same origin type. This is also removed by step 2 of the algorithm, _origin and importance_.
```

This leaves the `0` and the `3px`, which both have the same selector, hence the same _specificity_. 

We then look at _order of appearance_. The second one, the last of the two unlayered author styles, wins. 

```css
margin-left: 3px
```

> **Note:** The declaration defined in the user CSS, while it may have greater specificity, is not chosen as the cascade algorithm's _origin and importance_ is applied before the _specificity_ algorithm. The declaration defined in a cascade layer, though it may come later in the code, will not have precedence either as cascade layers have less precedence that unlayered styles.  _Order of appearance_ only matters when both origin, importance, and specificity are equal. 

## Author styles: inline styles, layers, and precedence

> The [table in Cascading order](#cascading_order) provided a precedence order overview. The table summarized the user-agent, user, and author origin type styles in two lines each with "origin type - normal" and "origin type - !important". The precedence in each origin type is more nuanced. Styles can be contained within layers within their origin type, and, with author styles, there is also the issue of where inline styles land in the cascade order. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [table in Cascading order](#cascading_order) provided a precedence order overview. The table summarized the user-agent, user, and author origin type styles in two lines each with "origin type - normal" and "origin type - !important". The precedence within each origin type is more nuanced. Styles can be contained within layers within their origin type, and, with author styles, there is also the issue of where inline styles land in the cascade order. 
```

The order in which layers are declared is important in determining precedence. Normal styles in a layer take precedence over styles declared in prior layers; with normal styles declared outside of any layer taking precedence over normal layered styles regardless of specificity. 

In this example, the author used CSS's {{CSSXref('@import')}} rule to import five external style sheets within a {{HTMLElement('style')}} information element.

```html
<style>
  @import unlayeredStyles.css;
  @import AStyles.css layer(A);
  @import moreUnlayeredStyles.css;
  @import BStyles.css layer(B);
  @import CStyles.css layer(C);
 p { 
    color: red;
    padding: 1em !important;
    }
</style>
```
and then in the body of the document we have inline styles:

```html
<p style="line-height: 1.6em; text-decoration: overline !important;">Hello</p>
```

>  In the CSS code block above, three cascade layers named "A", "B", and "C", were created, in that order. Three stylesheets were imported directly into layers and two were imported without creating or being assigned to a layer. The "All unlayered styles" in the list of normal author style precedence order includes styles from these two stylesheets and the additional unlayered CSS style blocks. In addition, there are two inline styles, a normal `line-height` declaration and an important `text-decoration` declaration:

Reviewer: This sentence starting with _The "All unlayered styles".._ is hard to understand. I think you mean the "row with order 4".
How about:
```suggestion
 In the CSS code block above, three cascade layers named "A", "B", and "C", were created, in that order. Three stylesheets were imported directly into layers and two were imported without creating or being assigned to a layer.
The "All unlayered styles" in the list below (normal author style precedence - order 4) includes styles from these two stylesheets and the additional unlayered CSS style blocks. In addition, there are two inline styles, a normal `line-height` declaration and an important `text-decoration` declaration:
```

  <tr><td>inline<code>style</code></td></tr>
  <tr><td>4</td><td>animations</td><td></td></tr>
  <tr><td rowspan="4">5</td><td>author - unlayered styles</td><td rowspan="4"><code>!important</code></td></tr>
  <tr><td>author - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>author - first declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>inline<code>style</code></td></tr>
  <tr><td rowspan="3">6</td><td>user - unlayered styles</td><td rowspan="3"><code>!important</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user - first declared styles</td></tr>
  <tr><td rowspan="3">7</td><td>user-agent  - unlayered styles</td><td rowspan="3"><code>!important</code></td></tr>
  <tr><td>user-agent - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user-agent - first declared styles</td></tr>
  <tr><td>8</td><td>transitions</td><td></td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Which CSS entities participate in the cascade

Only CSS property/value pair declarations participate in the cascade. This means that [at-rules](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/At-rule) containing entities other than declarations, such as a {{ cssxref("@font-face")}} rule containing _descriptors_, don't participate in the cascade. 

> For the most part, the properties and descriptors defined in at-rules don't participate in the cascade. Only at-rules as a whole participates in the cascade. For example, within a `@font-face` rule, font names are identified by [`font-family`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-family) descriptors. If several `@font-face` rules with the same descriptor are defined, only the most appropriate `@font-face`, as a whole, is considered. If more than one are identically appropriate, the entire `@font-face` declarations are compared using steps 1, 2, and 4 of the algorithm (there is no specificity when it comes to at-rules). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the most part, the properties and descriptors defined in at-rules don't participate in the cascade. Only at-rules as a whole participate in the cascade. For example, within a `@font-face` rule, font names are identified by [`font-family`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-family) descriptors. If several `@font-face` rules with the same descriptor are defined, only the most appropriate `@font-face`, as a whole, is considered. If more than one are identically appropriate, the entire `@font-face` declarations are compared using steps 1, 2, and 4 of the algorithm (there is no specificity when it comes to at-rules). 
```

Reviewer: All of this looks better to me.

The layer order of precedence is inverted for styles declared as `!important`. Important styles declared in a layer take precedence over important styles declared outside of a layer. Important styles in the first declared layer (A) take precedence over important declarations found in layer B, which takes precedence over C, which have precedence over important declarations in the unlayered styles. 

### Inline styles

Only relevant to author styles are inline styles, declared with the `style` attribute. Normal inline styles take precendence over any other normal author styles, no matter the specificity of the selector. If `line-height: 2;` were declared in a `:root body p` selector block in any of the five imported stylesheets, the line height would still be `1.6`. 

Normal inline styles take precedence over any other normal author styles unless the property is being altered by a CSS animation. 

> All important inline styles take precedence over all author styles, important and not, inline and not, layered and now. Important styles also take precedence over animated properties, but not transitioning properties. Three things can override an important inline style: 1) an important user style, 2) an important user agent style, or 3) a property value being transitioned.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
All important inline styles take precedence over all author styles, important and not, inline and not, layered and not. Important styles also take precedence over animated properties, but not transitioning properties. Three things can override an important inline style: 1) an important user style, 2) an important user agent style, or 3) a property value being transitioned.  
```

> ### Importance and layers

Reviewer 2: This has been the most surprising aspect of the feature for most people I've talked to. I don't know if it warrants some extra attention/guidance, but it changes the way people will have to think about `!important`. Rather than using it as a way to *override previously declared* styles (from eg a framework - which should be done by layering the framework lower), it should really be used to *guard things from later override* (eg the framework might get slotted in a low layer, but can still mark some styles as essential for functionality).

Author: Added the note:

> Note: !important reverses the precedence of cascade layers. For this reason, rather than using !important to override external styles, import frameworks, third party styles, widget stylesheets, etc., into layers, demoting their precedence. !important should only be used sparingly, if ever, to guard required styles against later overrides, in the first declared layer.

under importance and layers.

```

```css
margin-left: 5px
```

> The last one, the `5px` was declared as part of a cascade layer. Declarations in layers have less precendence than styles not in a layer within the same origin type. This is also removed by step 2 of the algorithm, _origin and importance_.

Reviewer: I think you mean (?)
```
@layer namedLayer {
  li {
    margin-left: 5px ;
  }
```

```suggestion
The last one, the `5px` was declared as part of a cascade layer. Declarations in layers have less precedence than styles not in a layer within the same origin type. This is also removed by step 2 of the algorithm, _origin and importance_.
```

This leaves the `0` and the `3px`, which both have the same selector, hence the same _specificity_. We then look at _order of appearance_. The second one, the last of the two unlayered author styles, wins. 

```css
margin-left: 3px
```

> Note that the declaration defined in the user CSS, while having a greater specificity, is not chosen as the cascade algorithm's _origin and importance_ is applied before the _specificity_ algorithm. The declaration defined in a cascade layer, though coming later in the code, is not chosed either. Cascade layers have less precendence that unlayered styles.  _Order of appearance_ only matters when both origin and importance and specifity are equal. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that the declaration defined in the user CSS, while having a greater specificity, is not chosen as the cascade algorithm's _origin and importance_ is applied before the _specificity_ algorithm. The declaration defined in a cascade layer, though coming later in the code, is not chosen either. Cascade layers have less precedence that unlayered styles.  _Order of appearance_ only matters when both origin and importance and specificity are equal. 
```

## Author styles: inline styles, layers, and precedence

> The [table in Cascading order](#cascading_order) provided a precedence order overview. The table summarized the user-agent, user, and author origin type styles in two lines each with "origin type - normal" and "origin type - !important". The precendence in each origin type is more nuanced. Styles can be contained within layers within their origin type, and, with author styles, there is also the issue of where inline styles land in the cascade order. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [table in Cascading order](#cascading_order) provided a precedence order overview. The table summarized the user-agent, user, and author origin type styles in two lines each with "origin type - normal" and "origin type - !important". The precedence in each origin type is more nuanced. Styles can be contained within layers within their origin type, and, with author styles, there is also the issue of where inline styles land in the cascade order. 
```

> The order in which layers are declared is important in determinining precedence. Normal styles in a layer take precedence over styles declared in prior layers; with normal styles declared outside of any layer taking precedence over normal layered styles regardless of specificity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The order in which layers are declared is important in determining precedence. Normal styles in a layer take precedence over styles declared in prior layers; with normal styles declared outside of any layer taking precedence over normal layered styles regardless of specificity. 
```

In this example, the author used CSS's {{CSSXref('@import')}} rule to import five external style sheets within a {{HTMLElement('style')}} information element.

```html
<style>
  @import unlayeredStyles.css;
  @import AStyles.css layer(A);
  @import moreUnlayeredStyles.css;
  @import BStyles.css layer(B);
  @import CStyles.css layer(C);
 p { 
    color: red;
    padding: 1em !important;
    }
</style>
```
and then in the body of the document we have inline styles:

```html
<p style="line-height: 1.6em; text-decoration: overline !important;">Hello</p>
```

>  Three cascade layers named "A", "B", and "C", were created, in that order. Three stylesheets were imported directly into layers and two were imported without creating or being assigned to a layer. The "All unlayered styles" in the list of normal author style precendence order includes styles from these two stylesheets and the additional unlayered CSS style blocks. In addition, there are two inline styles, a normal `line-height` declaration and an important `text-decoration` declaration:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
 Three cascade layers named "A", "B", and "C", were created, in that order. Three stylesheets were imported directly into layers and two were imported without creating or being assigned to a layer. The "All unlayered styles" in the list of normal author style precedence order includes styles from these two stylesheets and the additional unlayered CSS style blocks. In addition, there are two inline styles, a normal `line-height` declaration and an important `text-decoration` declaration:
```

Reviewer: I don't understand the meaning of the sentence "The "All unlayered styles" in the list of normal author style precedence order includes styles from these two stylesheets and the additional unlayered CSS style blocks."

Author: added "In the CSS code block above, t"

Reviewer: That helps, but the next sentence is still hard to parse. I'll propose a new wording separately.

 

|     | Author style      | Importance   |
| --- | ----------- | ------------ |
| 1   | A - first layer | normal       |
| 2   | B - second layer | normal       |
| 3  | C - last layer      | normal       |
| 4   | All unlayered styles       | normal       |
| 5   | inline `style`        | normal       |
| 6   | animations  |              |
| 7   | All unlayered styles      | `!important` |
| 8   | C - last layer   | `!important` |
| 9   |  B - second layer | `!important`       |
| 10   | A - first layer    | `!important` |
| 11   | inline `style`      | `!important` |
| 12   | transitions |              |

> In all origin types, the non important styles contained in layers have the lowest precendence. In our example, the normal styles associated with the first declared layer (A) have lower precedence than normal styles in the second declared layer (B), which have lower precedence than normal styles in the third declared layer (C). These layered styles have lower precendence than all normal unlayered styles, which includes normal styles from `unlayeredStyles.css`, `moreUnlayeredStyles.css`, and the `color` of `p` in the `<style>` itself. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In all origin types, the non important styles contained in layers have the lowest precedence. In our example, the normal styles associated with the first declared layer (A) have lower precedence than normal styles in the second declared layer (B), which have lower precedence than normal styles in the third declared layer (C). These layered styles have lower precedence than all normal unlayered styles, which includes normal styles from `unlayeredStyles.css`, `moreUnlayeredStyles.css`, and the `color` of `p` in the `<style>` itself. 
```

> If any of the layered styles in A, B, or C, have code similar to `:root body p { color: black;}`, those declarations are removed from consideration because of _origin_ as normal layered styles have less precedence than normal unlayered styles . If, however, the `:root body p { color: black;}` was found in `unlayeredStyles.css`, as both origin and importance are the same, _specificity_ would mean the black declaration had precedence.

Reviewer: I don't understand this sentence.

Author: is it better?

Reviewer: Yes.

The layer order of precedence is inverted for styles declared as `!important`. Important styles declared in a layer take precedence over important styles declared outside of a layer. Important styles in the first declared layer (A) take precedence over important declarations found in layer B, which takes precedence over C, which have precedence over important declarations in the unlayered styles. 

### Inline styles

> Only relevant to author styles are inline styles, declared with the `style` attribute. Normal inline styles take precendence over any other normal author styles, no matter the specificity of the selector. If `line-height: 2;` were declared in a `:root body p` selector block in any of the five imported stylesheets, the line height would still be `1.6`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only relevant to author styles are inline styles, declared with the `style` attribute. Normal inline styles take precedence over any other normal author styles, no matter the specificity of the selector. If `line-height: 2;` were declared in a `:root body p` selector block in any of the five imported stylesheets, the line height would still be `1.6`. 
```

Normal inline styles take precedence over any other normal author styles unless the property is being altered by a CSS animation. 

All important inline styles take precedence over all author styles, important and not, inline and not, layered and not. Important styles also take precedence over animated properties, but not transitioning properties. Three things can override an important inline style: 1) an important user style, 2) an important user agent style, or 3) a property value being transitioned.  

### Importance and layers

> The origin type precendence order is inverted for important styles. Important styles declared outside of any cascade layer have lower precendence than those declared as part of a layer. Important values that come in early layers have precedence over important styles declared in subsequent cascade layers. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The origin type precedence order is inverted for important styles. Important styles declared outside of any cascade layer have lower precedence than those declared as part of a layer. Important values that come in early layers have precedence over important styles declared in subsequent cascade layers. 
```

Take for example the following CSS:

```css
p {
  color: red;
}
@layer B {
  :root p {
    color: blue;
  }
}
```

> Even though the red is declared first and has a less specific selector, because unlayered CSS takes precendence over layered CSS, the paragraph will be red. Had we included an inline style on the paragraph setting it to a different color, such as `<p style="color: black">`, the paragraph would be black.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Even though the red is declared first and has a less specific selector, because unlayered CSS takes precedence over layered CSS, the paragraph will be red. Had we included an inline style on the paragraph setting it to a different color, such as `<p style="color: black">`, the paragraph would be black.
```

> When we add `!important` to this bit of CSS, the presedence order is reversed with the stylesheet:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When we add `!important` to this bit of CSS, the precedence order is reversed with the stylesheet:
```

```css
p {
  color: red !important;
}
@layer B {
  :root p {
    color: blue !important;
  }
}
```

> Now the paragraph will be blue. The `!important` in the earliest declared layer takes precendence of subsequent layers and unlayered important declarations. If the inline style contained !important, such as `<p style="color: black !important">`, again the paragraph would be black. Inline importance does take precedence over all other author declared !important declarations, no matter the specificity. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now the paragraph will be blue. The `!important` in the earliest declared layer takes precedence of subsequent layers and unlayered important declarations. If the inline style contained !important, such as `<p style="color: black !important">`, again the paragraph would be black. Inline importance does take precedence over all other author declared !important declarations, no matter the specificity. 
```

> **Note:** `!important` reverses the precedence of cascade layers. For this reason, rather than using `!important` to override external styles, import frameworks, third party styles, widget stylesheets, etc., into layers, demoting their precedence. `!important` should only be used sparingly, if ever, to guard required styles against later overrides, in the first declared layer.

> Styles that are transitioning take precendence over all important styles, no matter who or how they are declared.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Styles that are transitioning take precedence over all important styles, no matter who or how they are declared.
```

## Complete cascade order

> Now that we have a better understanding of origin type and cascade layer precedence, we realize the table in [Cascading order](#cascading-order) could have more accurately been represented by the following table: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that we have a better understanding of origin type and cascade layer precedence, we realize the table in [Cascading order](#cascading_order) could have more accurately been represented by the following table: 
```

<table>
<thead>
  <tr><th>Precedence</th><th>Style Origin</th><th>Importance</th></tr>
</thead>
<tbody>

>   <tr><td rowspan="3">1</td><td>user-agent - first declared layer</td><td rowspan="3">normal</td></tr>

Reviewer: Just to be clear, you mean that the sub rows also show a precedence right? So it is:
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5368500/167571641-178c5f24-5e19-49e5-a258-9950acd63161.png)

Author: They do, but it is:
1a. 1c. unlayered. 

didn't use a / b / c precisely not to confuse people. \

Author: the author styles table explains it, and is what developers need to understand. developers literally can't do anything about the layering in user or user agent styles. This table is purely for completeness of explanation.

Reviewer: OK. I _was_ confused in that my thinking was "does the order the sub rows appear here matter". I have no strong feelings on it though.

  <tr><td>user-agent - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user-agent - unlayered styles</td></tr>
  <tr><td rowspan="3">2</td><td>user - first declared layer</td><td rowspan="3">normal</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user - unlayered styles</td></tr>
  <tr><td rowspan="4">3</td><td>author - first declared layer</td><td rowspan="4">normal</td></tr>
  <tr><td>author - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>author - unlayered styles</td></tr>
  <tr><td>inline<code>style</code></td></tr>
  <tr><td>4</td><td>animations</td><td></td></tr>

>   <tr><td rowspan="4">5</td><td>author - unlayered styles</td><td rowspan="4">`!important`</td></tr>

Reviewer: ALL of these need to be marked up as code. Just one done here.
```suggestion
  <tr><td rowspan="4">5</td><td>author - unlayered styles</td><td rowspan="4"><code>!important</code></td></tr>
```

  <tr><td>author - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>author - first declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>inline<code>style</code></td></tr>
  <tr><td rowspan="3">6</td><td>user - unlayered styles</td><td rowspan="3">`!important`</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user - first declared styles</td></tr>
  <tr><td rowspan="3">7</td><td>user-agent  - unlayered styles</td><td rowspan="3">`!important`</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user-agent - last declared layer</td></tr>
  <tr><td>user-agent - first declared styles</td></tr>
  <tr><td>8</td><td>transitions</td><td></td></tr>
</tbody>
</table>

## Which CSS entities participate in the cascade

Only CSS property/value pair declarations participate in the cascade. This means that [at-rules](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/At-rule) containing entities other than declarations, such as a {{ cssxref("@font-face")}} rule containing _descriptors_, don't participate in the cascade. 

> ### @-rules and the cascade 

Reviewer: It feels like this heading might not be necessary.

I found this section a little hard to parse. Might be because I don't really understand "Only at-rule as a whole participates in the cascade." i.e. not saying this needs to be fixed because perhaps anyone who knows more about @font-face et al will find this obvious.

Author: removed the heading. added a lot of text, hopefully making it clearer.

> For the most part, the properties and descriptors defined in at-rules don't participate in the cascade.  Only at-rule as a whole participates in the cascade. For example, within a `@font-face` rule, font names are identified by [`font-family`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-family) descriptors. If several `@font-face` rules with the same descriptor are defined, only the most appropriate `@font-face`, as a whole, is considered.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the most part, the properties and descriptors defined in at-rules don't participate in the cascade. Only at-rules as a whole participates in the cascade. For example, within a `@font-face` rule, font names are identified by [`font-family`](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@font-face/font-family) descriptors. If several `@font-face` rules with the same descriptor are defined, only the most appropriate `@font-face`, as a whole, is considered.
```

While the declarations contained in most at-rules — such as those in {{cssxref("@media")}}, {{cssxref("@document")}}, or {{cssxref("@supports")}} — participate in the cascade, declarations contained in {{cssxref("@keyframes")}} don't. As with `@font-face`, only the at-rule as a whole is selected via the cascade algorithm.

> When it comes to {{cssxref("@import")}}, the @import doesn't participate itself in the cascade, but all of the imported styles do participate. If the `@import` defines a [named or anonymous layer](en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer), the contents of the imported stylesheet are placed into the specified layer. All other CSS imported with `@import` is which is treated as the last declared layer. This was discussed above

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When it comes to {{cssxref("@import")}}, the `@import` doesn't participate itself in the cascade, but all of the imported styles do participate. If the `@import` defines a [named or anonymous layer](en-US/docs/Web/CSS/@layer), the contents of the imported stylesheet are placed into the specified layer. All other CSS imported with `@import` is which is treated as the last declared layer. This was discussed above
```

Finally, {{cssxref("@charset")}} obeys specific algorithms and isn't affected by the cascade algorithm.

## CSS animations and the cascade

[CSS animations](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Animations), using {{ cssxref("@keyframes")}} at-rules, define animations between states. Keyframes don't cascade, meaning that at any given time CSS takes values from only one single {{cssxref("@keyframes")}}, and never mixes multiple ones together.

> If the several keyframe animations are defined with the same animation name, the last defined `@keyframes` in the origin and layer with the greatest precendence. Only one @keyframes definition is used, even if the @keyframes animate different property. Same named @keyframes are never combined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the several keyframe animations are defined with the same animation name, the last defined `@keyframes` in the origin and layer with the greatest precedence. Only one @keyframes definition is used, even if the `@keyframes` animate different property. Same named `@keyframes` are never combined.
```

> If the several keyframe animations are defined with the same animation name, the last defined `@keyframes` in the origin and layer with the greatest precendence. Only one @keyframes definition is used, even if the @keyframes animate different property. Same named @keyframes are never combined.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the several keyframe animations are defined with the same animation name, the last defined `@keyframes` in the origin and layer with the greatest precedence. Only one `@keyframes` definition is used, even if the `@keyframes` animate different property. `@keyframes` with the same name are never combined.
```

```css

p { 
    animation: infinite 5s alternate repeatedName;
}
@keyframes repeatedName {
    from {font-size: 1rem;}
    to {font-size: 3rem;}
  }

@layer A {
  @keyframes repeatedName {
    from {background-color: yellow;}
    to {background-color: orange;}
  }
}
@layer B {
  @keyframes repeatedName {
    from {color: white;}
    to {color: black;}
  }
}
```

> In this example, there are three seperate animation declaration named `repeatedName`. When `animation: infinite 5s alternate repeatedName` is applied to the paragraph, only one animation is applied: the keyframe animation defined in the unlayered CSS takes precedence over the layered keyframe animation declarations based on origin and cascade layer precedence order. In this example, only the element's font size will be animated. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this example, there are three separate animation declaration named `repeatedName`. When `animation: infinite 5s alternate repeatedName` is applied to the paragraph, only one animation is applied: the keyframe animation defined in the unlayered CSS takes precedence over the layered keyframe animation declarations based on origin and cascade layer precedence order. In this example, only the element's font size will be animated. 
```

> > **Note:** There are no important animations as property declarations in a {{cssxref('@keyframes')}} block that contain `!important` as part of the value are ignored.

Reviewer: Do you mean:
```suggestion
> **Note:** There are no important animations, as property declarations in a {{cssxref('@keyframes')}} block that contain `!important` as part of the value are ignored.
```
